📖 Update spot instances proposal with termination handler design (#3528)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20200330-spot-instances.md

Since this is not essential for running on non-guaranteed instances and existing solutions exist for each provider,
users can deploy these existing solutions until CAPI has capacity to implement a solution.

#### Termination handler design

To enable graceful termination of workloads running on non-guaranteed instances,

> a termination handler pod will need to be deployed on each spot instance.

Reviewer: Where would users get this termination handler?

Author: The plan is to make something similar to what `calico` has.

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit curious as to why a new termination handler rather than trying to leverage/extend existing projects, such as https://github.com/aws/aws-node-termination-handler for this purpose?

One of the things that stands out to me is that the aws-node-termination-handler supports an SQS-based system that would avoid the security concerns mentioned below.

Reviewer 3: Up for discussion as to whether this benefit is worth it or not, but the benefit of having our own termination handler is that it reduces the time to get a new Node.

Using a normal handler, that needs to be able to drain the node, then we have to wait for the Node to go away and MHC to remediate.

Using our own we can trigger machine deletion as soon as the termination notice is served, causing the machineset to create a new machine. 

In some cases this won't really be all that useful, but there are a couple I can think of where this is useful.

In GCP preemptible instances are only allowed to run for 24 hours and then get served a termination notice, this would save time here in replacing the lost compute capacity. Secondly, while CAPI doesn't support it yet, if a MachineSet supported multi AZ (which I believe there's discussion of somewhere), the MachineSet may be able to create a new instance in a different AZ if a single AZ is terminating its instances.

As a secondary benefit, by leveraging the machine controller shutdown logic, if we ever encode any extra logic for an instance (pre stop hooks), this would also be leveraged before the instance is actually gone (more useful on AWS with the 2 minute warning than others I admit).

Reviewer 2: @JoelSpeed is that something that we could address by working with related upstream projects to add support for Cluster API rather than having to replicate support for the various different ways to detect spot instance termination across various providers?

Author: @detiber One more benefit of having our own termination handler is that we will have only one project for all infra providers that support spot instances. This allows us to deliver to users only one binary instead of 3 different for each cloud.
It's not a full replication of other projects, it more like a stripped-down version of them that should reduce the complexity of integrating termination handlers functionality to CAPI.

> The termination pod will be developed to poll the metadata service for the Node

Reviewer 4: I'm not 100% sure this would work for Azure. At the bottom of this proposal we wrote:
```
Azure uses their Scheduled Events API to notify Spot VMs that they are due to be preempted.
This is a similar service to the AWS metadata service that each machine can poll to see events for itself.
Azure only gives 30 seconds warning for nodes being preempted though.

A Daemonset solution similar to the AWS termination handlers could be implemented to provide graceful shutdown with Azure Spot VMs.
For example see this [existing solution](https://github.com/awesomenix/drainsafe).
```
cc @awesomenix

Reviewer 5: We are planning integrate https://github.com/awesomenix/drainsafe to automatic cordon and drain any terminating instances for machinepools. We can probably extend it to execute additional termination handlers. Just a reminder that you get at most 30 seconds for a Spot VM on azure, I am not sure how much you can do in that time.

Author: For termination handlers, it should be sufficient to use node draining logic that we already have implemented in CAPI https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/master/controllers/machine_controller.go#L276

that it is running on.

> We will implement request/response handlers for each of the three cloud providers

Reviewer 4: "each of the three cloud providers" seems a bit restrictive, maybe this can be 
```suggestion
We will implement request/response handlers for each infrastructure provider that supports non-guaranteed instances 
```

that will enable the handler to determine if the cloud provider instance is due
for termination.

The code for all providers will be mostly similar, the only difference is logic for polling termination endpoint and processing the response.

> This means that cloud provider type can be passed as an argument and termination handler can be common for all providers and placed in a separate repository, for example: `kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-termination-handler`.

Reviewer: Given that this doesn't actually exist today, should we remove it?

Reviewer 4: Do you have a POC of what the code would look like?

Author: Yes, I'll put it all together and demonstrate it, probably next week.

Author: @CecileRobertMichon Hi, I made a prototype that should work https://github.com/alexander-demichev/termination-handler.

Should the instance be marked for termination, the handler will add a condition
to the Node object that it is running on to signal that the instance will be
terminating imminently.

```yaml
- type:     Terminating
  status:   True
  Reason:   TerminationRequested
  Message:  The cloud provider has marked this instance for termination
```

Once the Node has been marked with the `Terminating` condition, it will be
the MachineHealthCheck controller's responsibility to ensure that the Machine

> is deleted, triggering it to be drained and removed from the cluster.

Reviewer 4: Wouldn't MHC cause a new Machine to be created? Since the idea is to replace an unhealthy machine? Is that what we want when a spot VM is terminated for lack of capacity?

Author: I think yes, we need to delete machine and leverage node draining here

Reviewer 6: I think that for a first implementation letting the machine be recreated is reasonable. We can always do smarter things based on usage feedback once we have something in place.

To enable this, the following MachineHealthCheck should be deployed:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: MachineHealthCheck
metadata:
  name: cluster-api-termination-handler
  labels:
    api: clusterapi
    k8s-app: termination-handler
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      cluster.x-k8s.io/interruptible-instance: "" # This label is automatically applied to all spot instances
  maxUnhealthy: 100% # No reason to block the interruption, it's inevitable
  unhealthyConditions:
  - type: Terminating
    status: "True"
    timeout: 0s # Immediately terminate the instance

> ```

Reviewer: Shouldn't this something that MachinePool controller should handler rather than MachineHealthCheck?

cc @CecileRobertMichon

Reviewer 4: Spot instances are implemented for InfraMachines, not just MachinePools (in fact they aren't implemented for MachinePools yet, see Future work below). This solution only works for Machines. For ASGs/VMSS this would need to be part of the MachinePool controller, but we would need both.

#### Running the termination handler

> The Termination Pod will be part of a DaemonSet, which should be deployed manually by users. It will select Nodes which are labelled as spot instances to ensure the Termination Pod only runs on instances that require termination handlers.

Reviewer 4: "which should be deployed manually by users" -> can ClusterResourceSets be leveraged instead?

Reviewer 3: Are ClusterResourceSets usable at this point/will they be by the time we want to implement this proposal? I believe they would solve the issue well

Reviewer 4: They are usable (we use them in e2e) but are still experimental and turned on by feature flag.

Author: We can definitely use ClusterResourceSets for this

> The spot label will be added by the cloud providers as they create instances, provided they support spot instances and the instance is a spot instance. This also requires ability of cloud providers to sync labels between machines and nodes on workload cluster.

Reviewer 4: "This also requires ability of cloud providers to sync labels between machines and nodes on workload cluster." -> this seems like an important limitation, by this do you mean the Cluster API infra provider has to be able to sync labels between CAPI Machines and nodes, Infra Machines and nodes, or something else?

Reviewer 3: I think somehow we need to mark nodes as spot instances (using a well known label) so that the DaemonSet only deploys to spot instances.

Is there anywhere in CAPI already where we can put a label on a Machine and have that copied to the Node once it joins the cluster? If there is, could the Infra provider add a label to that set when it creates a spot instance?

Reviewer 6: Otherwise the core machine controller could infer from the `InfrastructureRef` if this is a non-guaranteed instance and add the label to the node as it adds the `nodeRef`

Author: I created an issue for tracking this https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/3504 and a POC PR for aws https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/pull/1876

#### Termination handler security

> To be able to perform the actions required by the termination handler, the pod will need to be relatively privileged.

Reviewer 4: "the pod will need to be relatively privileged." seems a bit vague, what access does it need exactly? What are the actions required by the termination handler?

Reviewer 3: Agreed this is a bit vague, I believe it is a precursive sentence for the rest of the content of this section, which explains the privilege level required to run this termination handler. Could probably just drop this whole sentence.

to the Node object that it is running on to signal that the instance will be
terminating imminently.

```yaml
- type:     Terminating
  status:   True
  Reason:   TerminationRequested
  Message:  The cloud provider has marked this instance for termination
```

Once the Node has been marked with the `Terminating` condition, it will be
the MachineHealthCheck controller's responsibility to ensure that the Machine
is deleted, triggering it to be drained and removed from the cluster.

To enable this, the following MachineHealthCheck should be deployed:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: MachineHealthCheck
metadata:
  name: cluster-api-termination-handler
  labels:
    api: clusterapi
    k8s-app: termination-handler
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      cluster.x-k8s.io/interruptible-instance: "" # This label should be automatically applied to all spot instances
  maxUnhealthy: 100% # No reason to block the interruption, it's inevitable
  unhealthyConditions:
  - type: Terminating
    status: "True"
    timeout: 0s # Immediately terminate the instance
```

#### Running the termination handler

> The Termination Pod will be part of a DaemonSet, that can be deployed using [ClusterResourceSet](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/master/docs/proposals/20200220-cluster-resource-set.md). The DaemonSet will select Nodes which are labelled as spot instances to ensure the Termination Pod only runs on instances that require termination handlers.

Reviewer 7: Why? I think this should be enabled for all nodes by default.
Even if the problem is clearly more important for spot instances, every node that is about to be terminated, for whatever reason, should attempt to properly drain.

Reviewer 3: The termination notices that these termination handlers rely upon are only implemented on the spot/preemptible instances. Eg on AWS, if the spot instance is going away, we get a 2 minute warning via the metadata endpoint. There is no equivalent for an on-demand instance.

I appreciate that there are times that cloud providers remove instances for maintenance reasons, and there may be some way programmatically to detect this, but as far as I know they use a different mechanism and are also far less frequent. For now at least, I think they are out of scope for these termination handlers

Author: Proposal referenced here https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/3528#issuecomment-700869780 describes the situation where the node can be unexpectedly shut down.
